Isolated Causal Effects
Victoria Lin 1 Louis-Philippe Morency


Abstract
As language technologies become widespread, it
is important to understand how changes in lan-
guage affect reader perceptions and behaviors.
These relationships may be formalized as the
isolated causal effect of some focal language-
encoded intervention (e.g., factual inaccuracies)
on an external outcome (e.g., readers’ beliefs).
In this paper, we introduce a formal estimation
framework for isolated causal effects of language.
We show that a core challenge of estimating iso-
lated effects is the need to approximate all non-
focal language outside of the intervention. Draw-
ing on the principle of omitted variable bias ,we
provide measures for evaluating the quality of
both non-focal language approximations and iso-
lated effect estimates themselves. We find that
poor approximation of non-focal language can
lead to bias in the corresponding isolated effect
estimates due to omission of relevant variables,
and we show how to assess the sensitivity of ef-
fect estimates to such bias along the two key axes
of fidelity and overlap . In experiments on semi-
synthetic and real-world data, we validate the abil-
ity of our framework to correctly recover isolated
effects and demonstrate the utility of our proposed
measures.


1. Introduction
The widespread use of language technologies has given
rise to an ever-expanding amount of human- and machine-
generated text data. From this vast body of data emerges
the opportunity to understand how information contained in
language relates to real-world outcomes. Elucidating these
relationships can help answer scientifically interesting ques-
tions and provide interpretability to texts and the models
that generate them. For instance, what language attributes
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspon-
dence to: Victoria Lin vlin2@andrew.cmu.edu .
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1

of Natural Language
1 Eli Ben-Michael 1
(a) The isolated causal effect of a language attribute like netspeak
can be learned by decomposing a text into focal language
and non-focal language .
(b) Non-focal language cannot be measured directly and instead
must be approximated. Due to potential omitted variable bias ,
which approximation we choose can significantly affect the iso-
lated effect estimate.
Figure 1. Isolated causal effects allow us to understand how
changes in language affect reader perceptions and behaviors.
(e.g., profanity ) cause readers to perceive a passage of text
as hateful? Does use of rapport-building language by thera-
pists help to improve patients’ mental health outcomes? Do
factual inaccuracies propagated in machine-generated texts
have negative impacts on readers’ beliefs or behaviors?
The way in which language choices affect reader perceptions
can be formalized as the causal effect of some language-
encoded intervention—often a linguistic attribute—on an
external outcome (Lin et al., 2023). However, because lan-
guage is highly aliased (i.e., correlated with itself), the effect
of such an intervention may be influenced by the surround-
ing linguistic context (Fong & Grimmer, 2023). For in-
stance, machine-generated texts with factual inaccuracies
may also contain other undesirable attributes likely to in-

Isolated Causal Effects of Natural Language
fluence readers’ reactions, such as inflammatory language.
If the causal effect of the factual inaccuracies is estimated
without accounting for aliased attributes, the resulting esti-
mate may contain the collective effect of both the factual
inaccuracies and some portion of the related inflammatory
language—making it difficult to determine whether action
should be taken to address factual inaccuracies only, inflam-
matory language only, or both.
Motivated by this limitation, we propose a new target of
inference: the isolated causal e

2. Problem Setting
Consider a text dataset D = { ( X ,Y ) ,..., ( X ,Y ) }
where texts X ∈ X are drawn i.i.d. from a distribu-
tion P , and individuals with potential outcome functions
Y ( · ) : X → R are drawn i.i.d. from the population G ,
where Y ( x ) denotes the potential outcome of individual i
if they were to read text x (Neyman, 1923 [1990]; Rubin,
1974). We study a setting in which all confounding between
the intervention and the outcome is captured in the text.
Such settings are an important and common case in natural
language processing (NLP) due to the widespread prac-
tice of labeling text data using external annotators who are
randomly assigned to texts. This assignment mechanism in
effect creates a randomized text experiment, eliminating con-
founding external to the text (Lin et al., 2024). Prominent
NLP benchmark datasets such as SST (Socher et al., 2013),
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), and MNLI (Williams et al.,
2018), for instance, all fall under this category.
Now let X be parameterized as X = { a ( X ) ,a ( X ) } ,
where a ( · ) : X → { 0 , 1 } is the intervention—the focal
language attribute for which we learn a causal effect—and
a ( · ): X → R is the non-focal portion of the text. Inthis
setting, we consider a ( · ) to be a known mapping from the
text to the intervention of interest. a ( · ) is also known as a
“codebook function” (Egami et al., 2022)
In naturally occurring text, a ( X ) is almost certainly dis-
tributed differently when a ( X ) = 1 compared to when
a ( X ) = 0 . For instance, suppose a ( X ) is humor , and
X is from a corpus of movie scripts. The non-focal (i.e.,
non-humor) parts of the scripts may include properties like
positive emotion or optimism . As these properties are posi-
tively correlated with humor, it is much more likely when
a ( X ) = 1 that they also equal 1 and when a ( X ) = 0 that
they also equal 0.
To isolate the effect of only the focal language attribute,
we must learn that effect over all possible variations of the
non-focal text to be sure that no influence comes from the
non-focal text. Formally, this is akin to learning the effect
while enforcing the same non-focal text distribution P for
both conditions of a ( X ) .
Definition 2.1 (Isolated causal effect) . Let P be some
target distribution over the non-focal language. Then the
isolated causal effect of a ( X ) on Y is given by:
τ = E [ E [ Y ( a ( X )=1 ,a ( X ) )
− Y ( a ( X )=0 ,a ( X ) )]]
We distinguish this from the natural causal effect defined
by Lin et al. (2023), where a ( X ) follows its natural dis-
tribution for both conditions of a ( X ) . The natural causal
effect is the collective effe

4. Experiments
To assess the validity of isolated effects estimated using our
framework, we examine how well we can recover the true
isolated effect τ with our estimator τ . We evaluate on
(cid:98)
two natural language datasets—one semi-synthetic and one
real-world—in which true isolated effects are known.
The IATT is less susceptible to overlap violations than the
IATE, as the IATT requires only that .
5

4.1. Datasets
Amazon( partially controlled setting). The Amazon dataset
(McAuley & Leskovec, 2013) consists of reviews from the
Amazon e-commerce site, each with a number of “helpful”
votes. To reduce unmeasured factors in the data, we generate
a new semi-synthetic outcome Y by predicting the number
of helpful votes as a linear function of a ( X ) ,a ( X ) ,then
adding noise. Here, a ( X ) ,a ( X ) encode the 10 categories
from the lexicon LIWC (see Section 4.2.1) that are most
predictive of vote count. These categories are binarized
to take the value 1 if the category is present in the text
and 0 otherwise. We note that while the semi-synthetic
construction allows us to control the outcome Y , we do not
have influence over the joint distribution P ( a ( X ) ,a ( X )) .
In this partially controlled data setting, we know both (1) the
true isolated effect of each of the 10 lexical categories and
(2) that the outcome model g can be fully learned from the
text. Combined, these allow us to evaluate whether our esti-
mator τ is able to recover the true isolated effect under
(cid:98)
best-case conditions. To allow for controlled evaluation un-
der more challenging conditions, we also generate a second
semi-synthetic Y where helpful votes are predicted as a non -
linear function of a ( X ) ,a ( X ) ; this setting is discussed in
Section B.2.
Semaglutide vs. Tirzepatide (SvT) (real-world setting) .
Here, we consider a slightly different setting in which the
intervention and outcome are both encoded in text (in con-
trast to the setting where the intervention is encoded in the
text and the outcome is a numerical value external to the
text). The SvT dataset (Dhawan et al., 2024) consists of
posts from weight-loss communities on the social media site
Reddit that mention one of two weight-loss medications:
semaglutide or tirzepatide. From these posts, Dhawan et al.
extracted the language-encoded binary intervention a ( X )
(which weight-loss medication the user took) and binary
outcome Y (whether the user lost more than 5 percent of
their starting body weight). The dataset further includes
a “ground truth” causal effect from a clinical trial on the
effects of semaglutide versus tirzepatide at various doses
(Fr´ıas et al., 2021)

5. Results and Discussion
In this section, we evaluate how well our method is able
to recover true isolated causal effects in the Amazon and
SvT datasets. Following this evaluation, we more closely
examine the relationship between isolated effect estimation
and omitted variable bias.
5.1. Amazon Dataset
In the Amazon dataset, we examine the isolated effects of
the 10 predictive LIWC categories used to construct the
semi-synthetic outcome. This section discusses the linear-
function outcome, but the same trends appear in the nonlin-
ear case (results in Section B.2).

IsolatedCausalEffectsofNaturalLanguage
isolated e ff ect (intervention = home) # dimensions
(a) Isolated effect of home .
isolated e ff ect (intervention = netspeak) # dimensions
(b) Isolated effect of netspeak .
Figure 2. Isolated causal effects of linguistic attributes on help-
fulness in the Amazon dataset. Error bars correspond to 95%
confidence intervals.
Across the 10 categories, we iteratively set each category
to be a ( X ) and estimate its isolated effect while using
the remaining lexical categories as a c ( X ) . To explore the
fidelity-overlap tradeoff under controlled conditions, we
evaluate our isolated effect estimate and our three OVB-
derived metrics— σ 2 , ν 2 , and robustness value—under dif-
(cid:98) (cid:98)
ferent choices of a c ( X ) . For each intervention, we restrict
s
the number of remaining lexical categories used as a c ( X ) ,
s
beginning with 2 categories and ending with 9.
Over multiple interventions (Figures 2a, 2b; additional re-
sults in Appendix B.1), we observe that as the dimensional-
ity (number of categories) of a c ( X ) increases, so does the
s
proximity of the isolated effect estimate to the ground truth.
Moreover, the behavior of the fidelity and overlap metrics
σ 2 and ν 2 is also consistent with expectations. As dimen-
(cid:98) (cid:98)
sionality increases, σ 2 decreases, indicating that outcome
(cid:98)
model fidelity is improving. At the same time, ν 2 increases,
(cid:98)
consistent with worsening overlap.
We further see that robustness values increase with a c ( X )
s
dimensionality, suggesting that gains in model fidelity out-
weigh losses in overlap. This may not be the case for all
datasets. As this dataset does not experience significant
problems with overlap (as seen from the limited range of
7

isolated isolated e e ff ff ect ect
Isolated Isolated e e ff ff ects ects (adjustment (adjustment using using OVB OVB comment) comment) metrics metrics (adjustment (adjustment using using comment) comment)
true true naive naive ours ours
isolated isolated e e ff ff ect ect
Figure 3. Isolated causal effect of we

6. Related Work
Causal effects of text. Our work on isolated causal effects
is situated within a recent literature on estimating text-based
causal effects. Egami et al. (2022) describe a conceptual
codebook framework for causal inference using text. Build-
ing on this, Fong & Grimmer (2023) conduct randomized
text experiments where texts are programmatically gener-
ated from pre-specified attributes. Lin et al. (2023) further
propose a method for transporting natural (i.e., non-isolated)
causal effects from randomized text experiments to poten-
tially non-randomized target distributions.
Most directly related to our work are several methods for
estimating isolated effects of natural language using specific
language representation pipelines. Though these works do
not explicitly distinguish isolated and natural effects, their
estimands are defined such that they are isolated, and so we
view these methods as complementary to ours. Pryzant et al.
(2021) estimate the effect of a proxy linguistic attribute from
observational data, where all other language information is
represented by an embedding from a transformer trained
to capture confounding. Dhawan et al. (2024) estimate
effects from observational data using the LLM prompting
approach we describe earlier. Finally, a recent paper by Imai
& Nakamura (2024) estimates text effects via a randomized
experiment in which LLM-generated texts are shown to hu-
man respondents; text representations can then be extracted
directly from the generating LLM.
Omitted variable bias. The diversity of language repre-
sentations that can be used in text-based causal inference
highlights the strong need for a way to understand the qual-
ity of representations and effect estimates. Our OVB-based
metrics provide a way to do this flexibly across any data
setting, which is important for real-world data where the
ground truth is not known. Our metrics draw directly on
the Chernozhukov et al. (2024) operationalization of OVB,
which in turn builds on a history of foundational work on
OVB (Goldberger, 1991; Frank, 2000; Angrist & Pischke,
2009; Oster, 2019; Cinelli & Hazlett, 2019).
Noting the importance of covariate representation in causal
inference, Clivio et al. (2024b) have proposed learning rep-
resentations that minimize information loss when balancing
covariates, which can help to improve overlap (Clivio et al.,
9

2024a). While these methods are not developed specifically
for text, the parallels between general covariate representa-
tion and language representation are evident.


7. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a framework for estimating the
isolated causal effect of a focal language-based interven-
tion. Estimating isolated effects is challenging because it
requires us to model not only the focal intervention but also
the non-focal language of the text. We introduce measures
for assessing the sensitivity of isolated effect estimates to
omitted variable bias in their non-focal language approxima-
tions along the axes of fidelity and overlap . We demonstrate
the ability of our framework to correctly recover isolated
effects across multiple language-encoded interventions, and
we explore how the way we approximate non-focal language
impacts fidelity, overlap, and the robustness of the effect
estimates themselves.
Our results point to several avenues for future research. This
paper studies a setting in which confounding is contained
fully in the text. Though NLP datasets are not often released
with external confounding data like information about an-
notators, it may still be interesting to study the case where
external confounding is present and measured. Additionally,
in this paper we treat the focal language-encoding function
a ( · ) as an accurate parameterization of the intervention of
interest, but if a ( · ) does need to be estimated, then estima-
tion error can lead to additional bias. Characterizing and
counteracting this is important future work. Finally, our
findings on OVB and robustness suggest a compelling line
of research on learning representations—perhaps not only of
language—that optimize the fidelity-overlap tradeoff to min-
imize omitted variable bias, making them explicitly suitable
for the task of causal inference.
Impact Statement
Broader impact. Recent advances in NLP have dramati-
cally increased the availability of language data and models
for common users. The resulting proliferation of texts and
models has raised potential ethical concerns around factual
inaccuracies (Monteith et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2023), bias
(Wan et al., 2023; Ferrara, 2024), and the black-box internals
of models (Guidotti et al., 2018; McDermid et al., 2021).
These concerns emphasize the growing need to understand
the impacts of texts and language models on the readers that
consume them. Our work on isolated causal effects builds
toward this goal.
Ethical considerations. The empirical analysis contained
in this work relies partially on representations from pre-
trained large language models, which may encode biases
from their training data. Interpretations of causal effects that

Isolated Causal Effects of Natural Language
rely on such representations should consider these biases.
We ad

References
Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. Mostly harmless econo-
metrics: An empiricist’s companion . Princeton university
press, 2009.
Byrd, J. and Lipton, Z. What is the effect of im-
portance weighting in deep learning? In Chaud-
huri, K. and Salakhutdinov, R. (eds.), Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research , pp. 872–881. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
byrd19a.html .
Chernozhukov, V., Cinelli, C., Newey, W., Sharma, A., and
Syrgkanis, V. Long story short: Omitted variable bias in
causal machine learning, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2112.13398 .
Cinelli, C. and Hazlett, C. Making Sense of Sensitivity:
Extending Omitted Variable Bias. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology ,82
(1):39–67,122019. ISSN 1369-7412. doi: 10.1111/rssb.
12348. URL https://doi.org/10.1111/rssb.
12348 .
Clivio, O., Bruns-Smith, D., Feller, A., and Holmes, C. C.
Towards principled representation learning to improve
overlap in treatment effect estimation. In 9th Causal
Inference Workshop at UAI 2024 ,2024a. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=I7Uibi1AMt .
Clivio, O., Feller, A., and Holmes, C. Towards represen-
tation learning for weighting problems in design-based
causal inference. In Kiyavash, N. and Mooij, J. M. (eds.),
Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence , volume 244 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research , pp. 856–880. PMLR, 15–
19 Jul 2024b. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v244/clivio24a.html .
10

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. In Burstein, J., Doran, C., and
Solorio, T. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp. 4171–4186, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19- 1423. URL
https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423/ .
Dhawan, N., Cotta, L., Ullrich, K., Krishnan, R., and Mad-
dison, C. J. End-to-end causal effect estimation from
unstructured natural language data. In The Thirty-eighth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems ,2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=gzQARCgIsI .
Egami, N., Fong, C.J., Grimmer, J., Roberts, M.E., and
Stewart, B. M. How to make causal inferences using
texts. Science Advances , 8(42):eabg2652, 2022. doi: 10.
1126/sciadv.abg2652. URL https://www.science.
org/doi/abs/10.1