Isolated Causal Effects
Victoria Lin 1 Louis-Philippe Morency


Abstract
As language technologies become widespread, it
is important to understand how changes in lan-
guage affect reader perceptions and behaviors.
These relationships may be formalized as the
isolated causal effect of some focal language-
encoded intervention (e.g., factual inaccuracies)
on an external outcome (e.g., readers’ beliefs).
In this paper, we introduce a formal estimation
framework for isolated causal effects of language.
We show that a core challenge of estimating iso-
lated effects is the need to approximate all non-
focal language outside of the intervention. Draw-
ing on the principle of omitted variable bias ,we
provide measures for evaluating the quality of
both non-focal language approximations and iso-
lated effect estimates themselves. We find that
poor approximation of non-focal language can
lead to bias in the corresponding isolated effect
estimates due to omission of relevant variables,
and we show how to assess the sensitivity of ef-
fect estimates to such bias along the two key axes
of fidelity and overlap . In experiments on semi-
synthetic and real-world data, we validate the abil-
ity of our framework to correctly recover isolated
effects and demonstrate the utility of our proposed
measures.


1. Introduction
The widespread use of language technologies has given
rise to an ever-expanding amount of human- and machine-
generated text data. From this vast body of data emerges
the opportunity to understand how information contained in
language relates to real-world outcomes. Elucidating these
relationships can help answer scientifically interesting ques-
tions and provide interpretability to texts and the models
that generate them. For instance, what language attributes
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspon-
dence to: Victoria Lin vlin2@andrew.cmu.edu .
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
1

of Natural Language
1 Eli Ben-Michael 1
(a) The isolated causal effect of a language attribute like netspeak
can be learned by decomposing a text into focal language
and non-focal language .
(b) Non-focal language cannot be measured directly and instead
must be approximated. Due to potential omitted variable bias ,
which approximation we choose can significantly affect the iso-
lated effect estimate.
Figure 1. Isolated causal effects allow us to understand how
changes in language affect reader perceptions and behaviors.
(e.g., profanity ) cause readers to perceive a passage of text
as hateful? Does use of rapport-building language by thera-
pists help to improve patients’ mental health outcomes? Do
factual inaccuracies propagated in machine-generated texts
have negative impacts on readers’ beliefs or behaviors?
The way in which language choices affect reader perceptions
can be formalized as the causal effect of some language-
encoded intervention—often a linguistic attribute—on an
external outcome (Lin et al., 2023). However, because lan-
guage is highly aliased (i.e., correlated with itself), the effect
of such an intervention may be influenced by the surround-
ing linguistic context (Fong & Grimmer, 2023). For in-
stance, machine-generated texts with factual inaccuracies
may also contain other undesirable attributes likely to in-

Isolated Causal Effects of Natural Language
fluence readers’ reactions, such as inflammatory language.
If the causal effect of the factual inaccuracies is estimated
without accounting for aliased attributes, the resulting esti-
mate may contain the collective effect of both the factual
inaccuracies and some portion of the related inflammatory
language—making it difficult to determine whether action
should be taken to address factual inaccuracies only, inflam-
matory language only, or both.
Motivated by this limitation, we propose a new target of
inference: the isolated causal effect for natural language (or
isolated effect for brevity). We define the isolated effect as
the causal effect of only the part of the language contained
in the intervention, or the average causal effect of the focal
text intervention over all possible variations of the rest of
thetext (Figure 1a).
In practice, estimating such an effect poses several major
challenges. (1) We must be able to formally define and
approximate not only the focal intervention but also the non-
focal language of a text: that is, all parts of the text external
to the focal intervention. (2) Incorrect modeling of the non-
focal language can lead to a biased or invalid estimate of the
isolated effect due to omission of key language context—a
formof omitted variable bias (OVB) (Figure 1b). Inother
words, valid isolated causal effects can only be measured
if the non-focal language is well-approximated. Therefore,
it is important to be able to assess the robustness of the
isolated effect estimate to errors or omissions in the non-
focal language approximations.
To address these challenges and to provide a practical path
toward estimating isolated effects, this paper introduces
a formal estimation framework for isolated effects of lan-
guage. Within this framework, we explore how the way
we approximate non-focal language impacts isolated effe

2. Problem Setting
Consider a text dataset D = { ( X ,Y ) ,..., ( X ,Y ) }
where texts X ∈ X are drawn i.i.d. from a distribu-
tion P , and individuals with potential outcome functions
Y ( · ) : X → R are drawn i.i.d. from the population G ,
where Y ( x ) denotes the potential outcome of individual i
if they were to read text x (Neyman, 1923 [1990]; Rubin,
1974). We study a setting in which all confounding between
the intervention and the outcome is captured in the text.
Such settings are an important and common case in natural
language processing (NLP) due to the widespread prac-
tice of labeling text data using external annotators who are
randomly assigned to texts. This assignment mechanism in
effect creates a randomized text experiment, eliminating con-
founding external to the text (Lin et al., 2024). Prominent
NLP benchmark datasets such as SST (Socher et al., 2013),
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2018), and MNLI (Williams et al.,
2018), for instance, all fall under this category.
Now let X be parameterized as X = { a ( X ) ,a ( X ) } ,
where a ( · ) : X → { 0 , 1 } is the intervention—the focal
language attribute for which we learn a causal effect—and
a ( · ): X → R is the non-focal portion of the text. Inthis
setting, we consider a ( · ) to be a known mapping from the
text to the intervention of interest. a ( · ) is also known as a
“codebook function” (Egami et al., 2022)
In naturally occurring text, a ( X ) is almost certainly dis-
tributed differently when a ( X ) = 1 compared to when
a ( X ) = 0 . For instance, suppose a ( X ) is humor , and
X is from a corpus of movie scripts. The non-focal (i.e.,
non-humor) parts of the scripts may include properties like
positive emotion or optimism . As these properties are posi-
tively correlated with humor, it is much more likely when
a ( X ) = 1 that they also equal 1 and when a ( X ) = 0 that
they also equal 0.
To isolate the effect of only the focal language attribute,
we must learn that effect over all possible variations of the
non-focal text to be sure that no influence comes from the
non-focal text. Formally, this is akin to learning the effect
while enforcing the same non-focal text distribution P for
both conditions of a ( X ) .
Definition 2.1 (Isolated causal effect) . Let P be some
target distribution over the non-focal language. Then the
isolated causal effect of a ( X ) on Y is given by:
τ = E [ E [ Y ( a ( X )=1 ,a ( X ) )
− Y ( a ( X )=0 ,a ( X ) )]]
We distinguish this from the natural causal effect defined
by Lin et al. (2023), where a ( X ) follows its natural dis-
tribution for both conditions of a ( X ) . The natural causal
effect is the collective effect of the focal language attribute
a ( X ) and the parts of the non-focal language with which it

Isolated Causal Effects of Natural Language
is naturally correlated.
We generalize three common assumptions for valid causal
inference to the language setting:
1. Consistency . Y = Y ( X ) = Y ( a ( X ) ,a ( X )) . The
observed outcome Y for an individual corresponds
to the potential outcome Y ( a ( X ) ,a ( X )) associated
with the text they actually receive.
2. No unmeasured confounding . Y ( x ) ⊥⊥ a ( X ) | a ( X )
for all x ∈ X . All confounding factors between the
intervention and the outcome are captured by the non-
focal portion of the text.
3. Overlap . 0 <P ( a ( X )=1 | a ( X )) < 1 . The interven-
tion a ( X ) has a non-zero probability of taking either
value, regardless of the non-focal portion of the text.
Note that this excludes the possibility that a ( X ) isa
deterministic function of a ( X ) .
As we mention earlier, the assumption of no unmeasured
confounding is commonly fulfilled for NLP datasets due to
text-annotator assignment protocols that eliminate external
confounding. In practice, it is also reasonable to believe that
the overlap assumption is fulfilled since any representation
of the non-focal language a ( X ) is non-exhaustive, and so
a ( X ) cannot be determined solely from the representa